[ARCHIVE: Even bodybuilding magnate Joe Weider, the man responsible for bringing Arnold Schwarzenegger to this country and someone who has '93seen them all'94 in terms of muscle development, told me recently that he had '93never seen a level of muscular definition to equal that of Bruce Lee in the photographs I'92ve seen of him in Enter the Dragon.'94 This is not to suggest that Lee had a poor physique prior to this film'97but there unquestionably had been a marked difference in his muscular definition. He had amped his muscularity somehow'97but what was the contributing factor? Certainly he was very physically active during this period of his life; choreographing take after take of fight scenes, running up to two miles a day, perfecting his martial art techniques, and performing the bodybuilding routines outlined in the previous chapters. All of these activities contributed to creating the physique Lee displayed in the films The Big Boss, Fist of Fury, and The Way of the Dragon. But why did Lee'92s physique look leaner and more defined, with each muscle group standing out in bold relief, in his last film, Enter the Dragon? The sole contributing factor (remember Lee'92s diet and aerobic and activity levels had not changed) was his acquisition in December 1972, and subsequent implementation into his daily training, of a multi-exercise weight-training machine called the Marcy Circuit Trainer.]
Certainly any Bruce Lee fan knows that Lee'92s physique looked its most defined (or, to use the bodybuilding nomenclature, '93ripped'94) during the movie Enter the Dragon. Not that his muscles were any bigger or more shapely, but the level of definition they had acquired by the time Lee had lensed this film was absolutely astounding. This unit, serial number 2175, was manufactured in Glendale, California, and shipped to Lee on the ocean freighter Lexa Maersk, and arrived in Hong Kong'92s Victoria Harbor on December 25, 1972. It arrived in one pallet and one crate, and cleared local customs for transportation to his home on January 6, 1973. A Trip to Hong Kong Fortunately, preceding the machine'92s arrival into Hong Kong by several days were two of Lee'92s favorite students and close friends, Ted Wong and Herb Jackson, the latter being an extremely talented welder and craftsman and the man who would in fact sign for the machine at Hong Kong Harbor, be responsible for its transport to Lee'92s house, and ultimately assemble it. Both Jackson and Wong had loaded up their suitcases with exercise equipment for Lee to train with prior to their trip to Hong Kong, for Lee had lamented the fact that he'92d left all of his training apparatus behind in California when he moved. The two men arrived just as The Way of the Dragon was premiering in Hong Kong. Lee told them, '93Guys, you'92ve arrived at just the right time! I'92ve finished some preliminary shooting for The Game of Death [a film in which two more of Lee'92s students, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Dan Inosanto, had shot sequences during the two months preceding Jackson and Wong'92s arrival] and now I'92ve got some time off before my next film.'94 This next film, as it turned out, was Enter the Dragon. Jackson and Wong were able to do some light training with Lee while in Hong Kong, but because of Lee'92s new and demanding schedule, it was very sporadic, consisting of a few runs, stretches, and light technique training. Lee w

[ARCHIVE: 13. BRUCE LEE'92S TOP 11 EXERCISES FOR THE BACK]
We should not neglect the training of our neck muscles. '97Bruce Lee Anyone who saw Bruce Lee'92s phenomenal shoulder-blade rotation sequence in the movie The Way of the Dragon came away amazed at how a person could elicit such dramatic development and control over their muscles. Lee'92s deltoids and neck muscles were dense and defined'97largely the result of many hours of martial art training, such as hitting the heavy bag, the top-and-bottom bag, and the speed bag, practicing chi sao and, of course, more conventional exercises. The only time Lee ever spoke publicly about the importance of neck training was during an interview he gave to Hong Kong'92s TV-B television station in 1972: We should not neglect the training of our neck muscles. This kind of training is very important in sports. In the training of neck muscles, an athlete may use the '93neck press'94 method and '93neck lift'94 method. In these methods, you tie a weight to your neck and lift it up with your neck, then move to the left and right. As time goes by, your neck muscles will become stronger and more powerful. It also strengthens your alimentary canal and bronchial nerve. Later in the interview Lee elaborated on some of the reasons one should strive to develop a strong neck in his or her training: If a man has a strong neck, he probably is a man of power. This training will also strengthen the tissues of your head. A man with a strong neck will not be knocked out easily. An athlete is like this. A boxer should also be trained in this way so that he will not be beaten down easily. A martial artist should do more neck muscle training so that he can have a strong neck. With this in mind, here are the neck and shoulder exercises that Bruce Lee held to be the most effective: 1. The Wrestler'92s Bridge One of the fundamental exercises Bruce Lee found effective for strengthening and developing the neck was the wrestler'92s bridge. To perform this movement properly, lie down with your back on the floor an