[ARCHIVE: Even bodybuilding magnate Joe Weider, the man responsible for bringing Arnold Schwarzenegger to this country and someone who has '93seen them all'94 in terms of muscle development, told me recently that he had '93never seen a level of muscular definition to equal that of Bruce Lee in the photographs I'92ve seen of him in Enter the Dragon.'94 This is not to suggest that Lee had a poor physique prior to this film'97but there unquestionably had been a marked difference in his muscular definition. He had amped his muscularity somehow'97but what was the contributing factor? Certainly he was very physically active during this period of his life; choreographing take after take of fight scenes, running up to two miles a day, perfecting his martial art techniques, and performing the bodybuilding routines outlined in the previous chapters. All of these activities contributed to creating the physique Lee displayed in the films The Big Boss, Fist of Fury, and The Way of the Dragon. But why did Lee'92s physique look leaner and more defined, with each muscle group standing out in bold relief, in his last film, Enter the Dragon? The sole contributing factor (remember Lee'92s diet and aerobic and activity levels had not changed) was his acquisition in December 1972, and subsequent implementation into his daily training, of a multi-exercise weight-training machine called the Marcy Circuit Trainer.]
Certainly any Bruce Lee fan knows that Lee'92s physique looked its most defined (or, to use the bodybuilding nomenclature, '93ripped'94) during the movie Enter the Dragon. Not that his muscles were any bigger or more shapely, but the level of definition they had acquired by the time Lee had lensed this film was absolutely astounding. This unit, serial number 2175, was manufactured in Glendale, California, and shipped to Lee on the ocean freighter Lexa Maersk, and arrived in Hong Kong'92s Victoria Harbor on December 25, 1972. It arrived in one pallet and one crate, and cleared local customs for transportation to his home on January 6, 1973. A Trip to Hong Kong Fortunately, preceding the machine'92s arrival into Hong Kong by several days were two of Lee'92s favorite students and close friends, Ted Wong and Herb Jackson, the latter being an extremely talented welder and craftsman and the man who would in fact sign for the machine at Hong Kong Harbor, be responsible for its transport to Lee'92s house, and ultimately assemble it. Both Jackson and Wong had loaded up their suitcases with exercise equipment for Lee to train with prior to their trip to Hong Kong, for Lee had lamented the fact that he'92d left all of his training apparatus behind in California when he moved. The two men arrived just as The Way of the Dragon was premiering in Hong Kong. Lee told them, '93Guys, you'92ve arrived at just the right time! I'92ve finished some preliminary shooting for The Game of Death [a film in which two more of Lee'92s students, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Dan Inosanto, had shot sequences during the two months preceding Jackson and Wong'92s arrival] and now I'92ve got some time off before my next film.'94 This next film, as it turned out, was Enter the Dragon. Jackson and Wong were able to do some light training with Lee while in Hong Kong, but because of Lee'92s new and demanding schedule, it was very sporadic, consisting of a few runs, stretches, and light technique training. Lee w

[ARCHIVE: Like the rest of his body, Lee'92s forearms possessed considerable power, which resulted in devastating punching techniques. (In the photograph below, note the development of the extensor digitorum of his right forearm!) This chapter details Lee'92s favorite forearm exercises and his instructions on how to perform them.]
Never cheat on any exercise; use the amount of weight that you can handle without undue strain. '97Bruce Lee Bruce Lee was a strong believer in forearm training to improve gripping and punching power. '93He was a forearm fanatic,'94 recalls Linda Lee Cadwell, laughing. '93If ever anyone came out with a new forearm course, Bruce would have to get it.'94 Lee even commissioned an old friend of his from San Francisco, George Lee (no relation), to build several forearm training devices to which Bruce could add weight for additional resistance. '93He used to send me all these designs for exercise equipment,'94 says George Lee, '93and I'92d build them according to his specs.'94 Bob Wall remembers that Lee'92s devotion to forearm training certainly paid great dividends in terms of his power and muscularity. '93Bruce had the biggest forearms proportionate to anybody'92s body that I'92ve ever seen,'94 says Wall. '93I mean, his forearms were huge! He had incredibly powerful wrists and fingers'97his arms were just extraordinary.'94 Lee was able to beat all opponents in wrist-wrestling, a contest where the two combatant'92s arms are fully extended with the aim of twisting the opponent'92s wrist in a counterclockwise direction to win. Lee not only exercised at wrist-wrestling, but according to Herb Jackson, a family friend of the Lee'92s and another man who used to construct equipment for Bruce, '93he wanted to be world champion at it.'94 '93If you ever grabbed hold of Bruce'92s forearm, it was like grabbing hold of a baseball bat,'94 says Taky Kimura, one of Lee'92s closest friends and a man who has continued to teach Lee'92s art in private classes in Seattle, Washington. Lee was so obsessed with strengthening his forearms that he used to train them every day. '93He said that the forearm muscle was very, very dense, so you had to pump that muscle every day to make it stronger,'94 recalls Dan Inosanto. Forearm Exercises Wrist-Roller One of Bruce Lee'92s favorite forearm training 