[ARCHIVE: Even bodybuilding magnate Joe Weider, the man responsible for bringing Arnold Schwarzenegger to this country and someone who has '93seen them all'94 in terms of muscle development, told me recently that he had '93never seen a level of muscular definition to equal that of Bruce Lee in the photographs I'92ve seen of him in Enter the Dragon.'94 This is not to suggest that Lee had a poor physique prior to this film'97but there unquestionably had been a marked difference in his muscular definition. He had amped his muscularity somehow'97but what was the contributing factor? Certainly he was very physically active during this period of his life; choreographing take after take of fight scenes, running up to two miles a day, perfecting his martial art techniques, and performing the bodybuilding routines outlined in the previous chapters. All of these activities contributed to creating the physique Lee displayed in the films The Big Boss, Fist of Fury, and The Way of the Dragon. But why did Lee'92s physique look leaner and more defined, with each muscle group standing out in bold relief, in his last film, Enter the Dragon? The sole contributing factor (remember Lee'92s diet and aerobic and activity levels had not changed) was his acquisition in December 1972, and subsequent implementation into his daily training, of a multi-exercise weight-training machine called the Marcy Circuit Trainer.]
Certainly any Bruce Lee fan knows that Lee'92s physique looked its most defined (or, to use the bodybuilding nomenclature, '93ripped'94) during the movie Enter the Dragon. Not that his muscles were any bigger or more shapely, but the level of definition they had acquired by the time Lee had lensed this film was absolutely astounding. This unit, serial number 2175, was manufactured in Glendale, California, and shipped to Lee on the ocean freighter Lexa Maersk, and arrived in Hong Kong'92s Victoria Harbor on December 25, 1972. It arrived in one pallet and one crate, and cleared local customs for transportation to his home on January 6, 1973. A Trip to Hong Kong Fortunately, preceding the machine'92s arrival into Hong Kong by several days were two of Lee'92s favorite students and close friends, Ted Wong and Herb Jackson, the latter being an extremely talented welder and craftsman and the man who would in fact sign for the machine at Hong Kong Harbor, be responsible for its transport to Lee'92s house, and ultimately assemble it. Both Jackson and Wong had loaded up their suitcases with exercise equipment for Lee to train with prior to their trip to Hong Kong, for Lee had lamented the fact that he'92d left all of his training apparatus behind in California when he moved. The two men arrived just as The Way of the Dragon was premiering in Hong Kong. Lee told them, '93Guys, you'92ve arrived at just the right time! I'92ve finished some preliminary shooting for The Game of Death [a film in which two more of Lee'92s students, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Dan Inosanto, had shot sequences during the two months preceding Jackson and Wong'92s arrival] and now I'92ve got some time off before my next film.'94 This next film, as it turned out, was Enter the Dragon. Jackson and Wong were able to do some light training with Lee while in Hong Kong, but because of Lee'92s new and demanding schedule, it was very sporadic, consisting of a few runs, stretches, and light technique training. Lee w

[ARCHIVE: This is the same exercise described in Chapter 2. The frog kick was said to be the brainchild of Dr. John Ziegler, who worked at the York Barbell Club in York, Pennsylvania, during the 1960s, had stated '93Frog kicks stretch and shape the waistline and at the same time help to remove the excess inches deposited around the lower abdomen'94. Their performance is simple'97just hang from a chinning bar and raise your knees up to touch your chest. Repeat for between 15 and 20 repetitions. It'92s easy, but effective, and is said to work wonders for a bad back.]
Once Lee had grown accustomed to the previous circuit-training program, he devised a strength-training workout that he felt was geared more toward his needs as a constantly evolving martial artist. The muscle groups Lee decided he wanted to emphasize with his strength training were the upper and lower back, the thigh and hip flexors, the calves, the brachialis muscle of the upper arm, the brachioradialis muscle of the forearm, and the shoulders. He also hooked up the low-pulley attachment of his Marcy Circuit Trainer to a special padded strap that he then fastened to his ankle in order to practice the initiation of three kicks: the front kick, the hook kick, and the side kick. This not only allowed Lee to strengthen the muscles involved in the execution of these martial art techniques, but also to focus on the all-too-often neglected aspect of balance during the performance of a kick, and the ability of his muscles to recover to a balanced position immediately after launching it (as well as during its execution). Additionally, working with this strap and pulley against resistance, Lee was effectively strengthening the stabilizer muscles of the lower limbs, thus ensuring that the muscles required for balance would be strengthened and his agility and recovery ability improved. The last time I saw Bruce was two months before he died, and I asked him, '93Are you working out every day still?'94 And Bruce jumped to his feet and said, '93Oh yeah, check this!'94 He flexed his quadriceps and a muscle that inserted right into the hip joint [the tensor fascia latae] just popped out. '93Hit that!'94 he said. So I did'97Jesus! It was just like hitting a piece of wood! Man, it was hard! I said, '93What'92s that muscle for?'94 And he said, '93This is for the inverted kick'97that'92s the muscle that pops it out there. '94 He told me that he had been doing special weight training to develop that. That '93special weight training,'94 particularly the low-pulley kicking exercises, cons